Proper RR typechecker (#19290)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/addendum/rewrite-rules.rst

This section describes the extension of Coq's reduction mechanisms with user-defined rewrite rules,
as a means to extend definitional equality. It should not be confused with the :ref:`rewrite tactic <rewritingexpressions>`
or :ref:`setoid rewriting <generalizedrewriting>` which operate on propositional equality and other relations which are defined in Coq.

> This extension is described in :cite:`Rew24`, following the theory developped in :cite:`TotR21`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extension is described in :cite:`Rew24`, following the theory developped in :cite:`TotR21`.
```

--------------------------

Rewrite rules support universe and sort quality polymorphism.
As with pattern variables, universe levels and sort quality variables

> must appear linearly in the pattern.

Author: Linear has a specific meaning in this context, which I hopefully explained well enough now

Sort quality variables which appear only in relevances in the replacement
will be detected if they also appear in a relevance in the pattern, such that

> they can be substituted when the rule is applied (otherwise you will get an undeclared sort quality error).

Reviewer: What is a relevance?  I can't guess.  Are you maybe saying the sort variables in the replacement that are unbound in the pattern are not allowed?

Author: I added a link to the relevant manual entry

   .. coqtop:: reset all warn

      #[universes(polymorphic)] Symbol raise@{q|u|} : forall (A : Type@{q|u}), A.
      Rewrite Rule raise_nat :=
        raise@{q|u} (forall (x : ?A), ?P) => fun (x : ?A) => raise@{q|u} ?P.

Rewrite rules, type preservation, confluence and termination
------------------------------------------------------------

The rewrite rules are typechecked in such a way that all substituted replacements

> have the type that the term before rewriting had (as described in :cite:`Rew24`).

Author: I still want to highlight that the replacement and the term being rewritten are different, hence why the types need to be checked. See my newer wording.

This means that the check is more stringent than ensuring the two sides have a shared type.
This also means that the pattern is typechecked in an alternate way to the regular terms,
where unification is more limited, which leads to rules that can respect the criterion

> but which the typechecker refuses nonetheless.

Author: Rewrite rules are addressed to people highly familiar with the mechanisms of Coq, so I don't see the point in hiding the fact that unification is the limiting factor. Also, I can't make sense of "terms accepted for rewrite rules" : you can accept a rewrite rule, or a replacement *given the typing information of the pattern*, but not a term without context.

> but which the typechecker refuses nonetheless.

Reviewer: Dropping the mention of unification was inadvertent.  But I suggest splitting the sentence in two so it's more clear that "where unification is more limited" modifies "regular terms" and not "an alternate way" (IIUC).  Second sentence maybe "Unification when typechecking regular terms is more limited, ..."

Is "criterion" the triangle criterion?  If so, maybe say that.  If not, what is the criterion?

> Also, I can't make sense of "terms accepted for rewrite rules"

My mistake

> but which the typechecker refuses nonetheless.

Author: What I mean is the following:
```
The pattern is typechecked differently from regular terms.
This difference includes the fact that the pattern is typechecked with an especially more restricted unification engine.
This restricting difference leads to the typechecker refusing rules that do respect the (typing, above) criterion.
```

For this reason, the typechecker only emits warnings on failure,

> letting the user take responsibility over the correctness of the rule.

Author: The typechecker doesn't fail, it fails *to verify the rule*. Also, the user isn't expected to correct the rule (otherwise this would raise an error), but to endorse the responsibility of ensuring that the rewrite rule does indeed satisfy the criterion above (or in general won't break the invariants of the typechecker)

> letting the user take responsibility over the correctness of the rule.

Reviewer: Got it, would be great to put "verify the rule" into the text.  It was a bit unclear.

I had no idea what "letting the user take responsibility over the correctness of the rule" meant, so I guessed what you might mean.

Confluence, which is required for the invariants that the typechecker use,
is currently not checked by the compiler.

> There are future plans to add a check using the triangle criterion :cite:`TotR21`.

Author: See the newer wording

> There are future plans to add a check using the triangle criterion :cite:`TotR21`.

Reviewer: I don't know what these invariants are and I had to look up the definition of confluence.  (Not that that is essential.)  Up to you whether more explanation would help readers.  Generally we aim to make the doc readily accessible to users who have only, say, a bachelor's degree in computer science or math.  Your choice.

> There are future plans to add a check using the triangle criterion :cite:`TotR21`.

Author: Unfortunately, rewrite rules are still so experimental that users who don't know about confluence should not use them in the first place.
Do you think I should make the header even more explicit in this regard ?

> Similarly, termination is not checked by the compiler.

Reviewer: I don't see a definition of "compiler" here, so a bit vague.  Maybe a phrase such as "when the rules are compiled" is a step forward.  Also clarify when the rules are compiled--as each rule is defined, separately?  All together in a batch when XXX?

> Similarly, termination is not checked by the compiler.

Author: I expanded this sentence now

--------------------------

Rewrite rules support universe and sort quality polymorphism.
As with pattern variables, universe levels and sort quality variables
must appear linearly (not more than once each) in the pattern.

> Sort quality variables which appear only in :ref:`relevance marks<relevancemarks>` in the replacement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sort quality variables which appear only in :term:`relevance marks <relevance mark>` in the replacement
```

Ties the hyperlink to the definition of the glossary term.

will be detected if they also appear in a relevance mark in the pattern, such that
they can be substituted when the rule is applied (otherwise you will get an undeclared sort quality error).

   .. coqtop:: reset all warn

      #[universes(polymorphic)] Symbol raise@{q|u|} : forall (A : Type@{q|u}), A.
      Rewrite Rule raise_nat :=
        raise@{q|u} (forall (x : ?A), ?P) => fun (x : ?A) => raise@{q|u} ?P.

Rewrite rules, type preservation, confluence and termination
------------------------------------------------------------

The rewrite rules are typechecked so that all substituted replacements

> have the type that the term being rewritten had (as described in :cite:`Rew24`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have the type that the term being rewritten has (as described in :cite:`Rew24`).
```
no need for past tense

> have the type that the term being rewritten had (as described in :cite:`Rew24`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have the type that the term being rewritten has (as described in :cite:`Rew24`).
```

No need for the past tense

This means that the check is more stringent than ensuring the two sides have a shared type.
This also means that the pattern is typechecked differently from regular terms,
with an especially more restricted unification engine,
which leads to the typechecker refusing rules that do respect the criterion.
For this reason, the typechecker only emits warnings on failure,
letting the user take responsibility over the correctness of the rule.

Coq currently doesn't check for confluence of the rewrite rules,

> even though it is required for the invariants that the typechecker use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
even though it is required for the invariants that the typechecker uses.
```

There are plans to add a check using the triangle criterion described in :cite:`TotR21`.

Rocq doesn't check for termination of the rewrite rules either.
Indeed, non-terminating rules are generally fine except for one thing:

> the typechecker might not always terminate anymore.

Author: No they don't ?
1. Rocq doesn't check for RR termination.
2. Hence, Rocq's typechecker itself might not terminate

> Coq doesn't check for termination of the rewrite rules either.
> The reason is that allowing non-terminating rules doesn't break the invariants used by the typechecker
> except for one which is very noticeable: the typechecker might not always terminate anymore.
> Contrary to the previous two properties, non-termination cannot introduce crashes or anomalies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Coq doesn't check for termination of the rewrite rules either.
Non-terminating rules don't break the invariants used by the typechecker
except that it may cause typechecker might not always terminate anymore.
Unlike the previous two properties, non-termination cannot introduce crashes or anomalies.
```
"Contrary to" isn't quite idiomatic.  What are the two properties (confluence and the triangle criterion)?
Properties are different from invariants or the same?
The first two sentences still seem pretty wordy; maybe "If the rules don't always terminate, the typechecker may not always terminate, either."

----

I guess including commutativity of add as a rule would not terminate--you get an infinite loop of rewriting.  Or associativity.  If all rewrite rules replace the original with shorter terms, IIUC that would be guaranteed to terminate.

Is non-termination a property of individual rules?  Or is it possible to have two rules that terminate if only one is defined but may not terminate if both are defined?  If it's the former, maybe it's possible to detect (some?) rules that won't terminate (for a future PR)?

I think a rewrite rule x -> x + 0 would eventually run out of memory.  Not sure if that will kill Coq.  Is it possible to get a stack overflow for a sufficiently large term?

There should probably be a call to `Control.check_for_interrupt ()` in the typechecker so the user can interrupt the typechecker manually rather than kill the process.

If the forgoing comments make sense, it would be nice to work those thoughts into the doc to help the reader.  I can draft some words if you like.

Author: I changed and simplified this paragraph.
The two properties are (1) type preservation and (2) confluence. Invariants are a set of properties on the program state, whereas the properties I talk about here are only on the formal rewrite rules, so I take them as separate although very related.

A rewrite rules to swap arguments of addition would indeed not terminate; associativity would.
Non-termination is not local (not a property of individual rules). Example: `S true => S false` on one hand, `S false => S true` on the other hand. This is in part what makes it difficult to devise a termination checker. Size is also difficult to estimate, since beta-reduction doesn't play nicely with most notions of size.

The general mechanism for interruptions in reductions and conversion should apply in my case, so I'm not sure what comments should be added.

Reviewer: It would be good if you could test that the interruption mechanism works as you expect it for the non-terminating case.

Compatibility with the eta laws
-------------------------------

Currently, pattern matching against rewrite rules pattern cannot do eta-expansion or contraction,
which means that it cannot properly match against terms of functional types or primitive records.
Rocq checks whether this may happen,

> but the check is not complete (false positives).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but the check is imperfect (it reports false positives).
```

"(false positives)" alone is not clear.  I'm guessing this is what you mean.  "not complete" suggests some problems are not found when IIUC the problem is that reports false positives.

> Therefore, the check fails by only emitting a warning, similarly to the check for type preservation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the check fails by only emitting a warning, similar to the check for type preservation.
```

> A check is done to test whether this may happen,
> but it is not complete (false positives)
> and thus only emits a warning if failed, as with type preservation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Coq checks whether this may happen,
but it is not complete (it reports false positives).
Therefore it only emits a warning if the check fails, similar to the behavior of
violations of type preservation.
```

IIUC.
Mentioning type preservation in this sentence may be distracting, seems like it's another topic IMHO.
